Caren 2.5
(12/02/2007)

The CAREN System is a Java based implementation of an Association rules Generator.
A new depth-first implementation is now available.
The main purpose was to develop an association rules generator target for building prediction models.

This program can deal with two different dataset formats. Attribute/Value and basket format.
In attribute/value format, the first line of the dataset should contain the names of the attributes.
One should use the switch (-Att) or (-Bas) to declare attribute/value mode or basket mode. Default mode is -Bas.
In -bas mode the dataset should be of the form:

	TransactionID Items


Example:
	001            1
        001            2
        003            1
or
        001            1 2
        003            1


Defining the right separator character is vital for obtaining meaningful results. The option is -s
and should be used as ex: java caren dataset 0.1 0.5 -s, -d.  Notice no space between switch and character!

In -Att mode one can make use of three different discretization methods. Binary, Class Intervals  and Srikant 
(see README-log for details). It can also declare that the dataset contains null values (using switch -null).

One can generate a list of options using the command prompt: 



>java caren -help.




Several new metrics can be used to filter rules and used in prediction models. 
Conviction, laplace and Lift are examples. (see -help version for details).

Several items filtering options exist to filter rules. Two for consequent filtering and three for antecedent filtering.
In -Att mode, it is possible to filter consequents by item and by attribute occurrence.

A new option for defining maximal and minimal size of rules exists (-RS and -rs). 

There are four different output formats. Standard (text file), CSV format, Prolog file format and PMML (XML decision model) 
format. In CSV format all filtering metrics (confidence, conviction lift and chi^2) are written along the rules.

Use the -max switch to expand the expected transaction size. Maximal transaction size is equal to number of frequente 
items. The default transaction size is 500 items.

A more detail description of all caren features can be read in document README-caren.


A prediction module is now available. It makes use of prediction models generated from association rules.
A model can be generated using the $caren$ program (option -p). Each model can be used by the command 
$predict$. Do not forget to specify the class attribute (class item) using the switch -H (or -h) and (-class) when using 
$caren$. Only rules with this consequent must be generated 
(and will be considered by the prediction model). This module implements three different classification methods: 
BestRule (decision list), Voting and Class Distribution.
These methods can also make use of the different metrics available in the caren system: confidence, lift, conviction, etc.
It can deal with all kinds of prediction models generated by Carendf and Carenclass 
(using any discretization method, null values, etc). Use 

>java predict -help.

command to list available options.

Read file README-predict for all details concerning the $predict$ module.

The module $caren$ is an efficient association rules generator that was developed for classification purposes.
It includes several features (for instance subgroups rules generation) and can be used to derive prediction models. 


A new module $convert$ for discretizing numeric attributes is available. Check 

> java convert -help


Read file README-convert to check all the details concerning this module.



Notice: the new implementation is for the 1.5 (or higher) Java package. This version was compiled using JSDK1.5.0


Write questions, comments or send email to Paulo Azevedo (pja@di.uminho.pt)


